My Wireshark Analysis Guide: How I Dig into Network Traffic

Hey there! I put together this guide to show you how I use Wireshark to analyze network traffic. It’s one of my go-to tools for figuring out what’s happening on a network, whether I’m troubleshooting a slow app, sniffing out security issues, or just geeking out over protocols. I’ve spent a lot of time with Wireshark, and I want to share my approach to capturing, filtering, and making sense of packets in a way that’s clear and practical. This is for my GitHub portfolio, so you’ll see how I work and how I’d explain this to someone else.

What’s Inside





Why Wireshark’s My Tool of Choice



Getting Wireshark Up and Running



Grabbing Network Traffic



Filtering the Noise



Breaking Down Packets



Stuff I’ve Done with Wireshark



My Tips for Success



Where to Learn More

Why Wireshark’s My Tool of Choice

Wireshark is like a superpower for network analysis. It lets me capture packets in real time, dig into hundreds of protocols, and get a clear picture of what’s going on. I’ve used it to track down why a website’s loading slowly, spot sketchy traffic, or even just learn how protocols like TCP or HTTP actually work. It’s free, open-source, and packed with features, which is why I keep coming back to it.

Getting Wireshark Up and Running

Here’s how I set things up to make sure Wireshark’s ready to roll:





Installing It:





I grab Wireshark from wireshark.org for whatever system I’m on—Windows, macOS, or Linux.



I make sure to install npcap on Windows or libpcap on Linux/macOS so it can capture packets properly.



Setting It Up:





I pick the right network interface, like my Wi-Fi or Ethernet, to focus on the traffic I care about.



On Linux, I’ll run it with sudo to get capture permissions. On Windows, I just make sure I’m running as admin.



Tweaking It:





I customize the display to show stuff like packet timestamps or sizes right in the main view.



I’ve got profiles saved for different tasks, like one for security checks and another for performance stuff.

This setup gets me ready to dive into traffic without any hiccups.

Grabbing Network Traffic

Capturing packets is where the fun starts. Here’s my process:





Starting a Capture:





I open Wireshark, pick the interface I want (like my Ethernet connection), and hit the green shark fin to start capturing.



I steer clear of the “any” interface—it grabs everything and makes a mess.



Stopping and Saving:





When I’ve got enough data, I hit the red square to stop and save it as a .pcapng file so I can come back to it later.



For example, I once captured traffic from a web server to figure out why it was acting sluggish and saved the file to share with my team.

Pro Move: I always double-check I’m capturing the right interface to keep things clean and manageable.

Filtering the Noise

Filters are my secret weapon for cutting through the clutter. I use two kinds:





Capture Filters:





I set these before I start to only grab what I need, like host 192.168.1.10 for a specific device or port 80 for HTTP traffic.



Once, I used tcp port 443 to zero in on HTTPS traffic for a security audit.



Display Filters:





After capturing, I use these to focus on specific packets, like ip.src == 192.168.1.10 to see traffic from one source or http.response.code == 500 to find server errors.



I’ve used tcp.flags.syn == 1 && tcp.flags.ack == 0 to spot potential scans on a network.

Filters I Lean On:







Filter



What It Does





ip.addr == 192.168.1.1



Shows traffic to/from a specific IP





tcp.port == 80



Grabs HTTP traffic





dns



Pulls up DNS queries and responses





!arp



Skips ARP packets to reduce noise

How I Do It:





I type the filter in the bar at the top, hit Enter, and check the results.



I save my go-to filters (like one for catching DNS issues) so I can pull them up fast.

Breaking Down Packets

Here’s how I make sense of what I’ve captured:





Checking the Packet List:





I scan the main list for basics like IPs, protocols, and timestamps.



For example, I caught a TCP retransmission issue once just by skimming this list.



Digging into Details:





I click a packet and expand its layers (like Ethernet > IP > TCP) to check headers or payloads.



I once debugged an API by looking at HTTP headers to spot a wrong content-type.



Following Streams:





I right-click and pick Follow > TCP Stream to see a full conversation, like an HTTP request and response. This helped me fix a broken login page.



Using Stats:





I check Statistics > Protocol Hierarchy to see what’s dominating the traffic (like 80% TCP).



Statistics > Conversations shows me who’s talking to who, which helped me find a device hogging bandwidth.

Real Example: I used Statistics > TCP Stream Graphs to track down a laggy connection caused by a firewall rule gone wrong.

Stuff I’ve Done with Wireshark

Here’s a peek at how I’ve used Wireshark in real projects:





Fixing Slow Apps: I pinned down a DNS issue causing a website to crawl by filtering dns and checking response times.



Security Checks: I caught someone trying to brute-force SSH by filtering tcp.port == 22 and tracking the source IPs.



Network Tuning: I used Statistics > IO Graph to see bandwidth usage and optimize a network during a busy event.



Learning Protocols: I’ve captured TCP handshakes and HTTP requests just to study how they work under the hood.

My Tips for Success





Keep It Focused: I use capture filters to avoid grabbing junk data, which keeps my files small.



Take Notes: I add comments to packets (Packet > Add Comment) so I can remember what I found and share it with others.



Stay Safe: I’m careful not to capture sensitive stuff like passwords unless I have to, and I encrypt my .pcap files.



Update Often: I keep Wireshark updated to get the latest features and stay secure.


Know Your Protocols: Understanding TCP, HTTP, and DNS inside out makes my analysis way faster.

Where to Learn More

If you want to get better at Wireshark, here’s what’s helped me:


Wireshark Docs for the nitty-gritty details.


Wireshark Wiki for protocol breakdowns.

Ask Wireshark for community help when I’m stuck.

Online courses on Udemy—I’ve taken a couple to sharpen my skills.
